REPORT.md, before:

<h1 align = "center"> Operating Systems - Project 2 </h1>
<h2 align = "center"> ECS 150 - Winter Quarter 2023 </h2>
<h3 align = "center"> Chloe Bercy and Jen Galicia </h3>
<h4 align = "center"> February 21, 2023 </h4>

## Table of Contents
1. Summary
2. Implementation
    * Queue
    * Uthread
    * Semaphore
    * Preemption
3. Testing
4. Sources

## Summary
`libuthread` is a basic user-level thread library for Linux. It provides an 
interface for applications to create and run independent threads concurrently.
Like most lightweight user-level thread libraries, this library can create new 
threads, schedule the execution of threads using a round-robin algorithm, be 
preemptive, and provide a thread synchronization API, semaphores.

## Implementation
The implementation of `libuthread` is made up of several major phases - queue, 
uthread, semaphore, and preemption.

#### Queue API
We implemented a FIFO queue using a linked list data structure. Just like any 
other queue, it has the typical `create`, `destroy`, `enqueue`, `delete` and 
`dequeue` functions. However, what stands out in our queue API is the 
`queue_iterate()` function.

The `queue_iterate()` function is a generic way to call a custom function on 
each item that is enqueued in the queue. How it works is that it takes a queue 
and a queue callback function type `queue_func_t` as the parameters. 

`queue_func_t func` is the function to be defined by the user. It takes a queue 
and a void pointer to a data item as parameters. 

Within the `queue_iterate()` function, it first checks to see if `queue` and 
`func` are `NULL`, if so, it returns -1. We then a run a for-loop to go through 
each currently enqueued item in the queue. The current item is received as the 
data parameter in the queue callback function type so the program knows which 
data item to run the function defined by the user on. After iterating through 
each item in the queue `queue_iterate()` returns 0 to indicate that it has ran 
successfully. 

#### Uthread API
The standard interface for threads on a Unix-style operating system is known as 
the `POSIX thread` or `pthread`. In this project, we only implement the 
following functions: `uthread_yield()`, `uthread_exit()`, `uthread_create()`, 
`uthread_run()`, `uthread_block()`, and `uthread_unblock()`.

It's important to note that we have the following global variables: `struct 
uthread **current` and `queue_t *ready_q`. This is so that all of the functions 
in `uthread.c` have access to the thread control blocks and the queue. 

The function to first be called by the application is `uthread_run()` which 
creates the first user thread. We inititalize the `ready_q` using the 
`queue_create()` function and we also initialize the `current` tcb by `malloc`. 
We then call the `uthread_create()` function to create and begin the queue and 
the first thread. 

As the name of the `uthread_create()` function suggests, this creates a new 
thread. This is done by malloc-ing a `uthread_tcb` called newTCB and its 
context. The function then calls `uthread_ctx_init()` which initializes the 
context for a newly created thread. Once context has been created, that TCB is 
then queued to our `ready_q`.

Going back to the `uthread_run()` function, after `uthread_create()` is called, 
we enter a while-loop that calls `uthread_yield()` as long as the the `ready_q` 
is not empty. 

`uthread_yield()` allows for other threads in the queue to execute, not just the
currently active and running thread. In this function, we define 
`struct uthread tcb *uthread_prev` to which we set it to the current tcb. This 
is to save the context of the current thread that is running. We then define 
`struct uthread_tcb *uthread_next`, set this pointer to the next item in the 
queue, and set it to the current tcb to update it. Once this is complete, the 
function calls `uthread_ctx_switch()`, which basically switches the contexts of
the previous thread and the next thread. The application will be able to 
resume and execute the next thread. 

Both the functions `uthread_block()` and `uthread_unblock()` comes more into 
play when we head over to the implementation of semaphores. How these two 
functions work will be explained in the next section.

With that, we are left with the final function in our queue API, which is 
`uthread_exit()`. This function destroys the current tcb stack and it frees the 
context of the current thread. If there happens to be more threads in the queue,
the current simply gets updated to the next thread in the queue. 

#### Semaphore API + uthread_block() + uthread_unblock()
To control access to a common resource by multiple threads, we implemented the 
following functions in our semaphore API: `sem_create()`, `sem_destroy()`, 
`sem_down()`, `sem_up()`.

In the `sem_create()` function, it initializes a new semaphore. Along with that,
it also creates a new queue to which we set it to the `queue_t blocked_q` data 
member as defined in the `struct semaphore`. The reasoning behind this is so 
that the application can differentiate the threads that are ready for execution 
and the threads that are blocked from executing. The count of the semaphore is 
set to the count passed through the `size_t count` parameter. 

The `sem_destroy()` destroys the semaphore, as the name suggests. It checks to 
see if the semaphore is `NULL` or if there are any threads in the `blocked_q`. 
If either of those are true, then the function returns `-1`. If not, then 
`queue_destroy()` gets called to destroy the queue of blocked threads and 
returns 0 to indicate that the semaphore has been successfully destroyed. 

`sem_down()` is the function that is called when a thread asks to grab a 
resource. It takes a semaphore as a parameter and checks to see if it is `NULL`.
If the count of the semaphore is 0, it enters a while-loop in which the current 
threads are queued to the `blocked_q`. Afterward, `uthread_block()` is called. 
Otherwise, the count is decremented.

Similar to the `uthread_yield()` function, `uthread_block()` swaps the contexts 
of the current tcb with the next tcb. What sets these two functions apart, 
however, is that `uthread_yield()` queues the current thread back into the ready
queue as aforementioned. To unblock the threads that are in the blocked queue
--in other words, put the blocked threads back into the ready queue--we simply 
call `queue_enqueue()` and queue the current thread to the `ready_q`. All of 
this is defined in the `uthread_unblock()` function. 

To release a semaphore, `sem_up()` is called. Just like the `sem_down()` 
function, it begins with checking to see if the semaphore is `NULL`. If it 
isn't, then the count is incremented. If there happens to be any threads in the 
`blocked_q`, it initializes a pointer to indicate the next thread to be 
executed, calls the `queue_dequeue()` function to take the oldest item in the 
`blocked_q`, and calls `uthread_unblock()` to put the item that has been pulled 
back into the `ready_q`.

#### Preemption
TO NOTE: The implementation of preemption does not currently work as desired.
It uses ITIMER_REAL and SIGALRM, instead of ITIMER_VIRTUAL and SIGVTALARM due to
difficitulties in debugging issues with unsuccessful `setitimer(ITIMER_VIRTUAL)`
calls. 

The preemption API exists to prevent uncooperative threads from keeping the 
processing resource for themselves. We have implemented the following functions:
`preempt_start()`, `preempt_stop()`, `preempt_enable`, and `preempt_disable()`. 

In `preempt_start()`, we simply configure the timer interrupt handler. It then 
takes `preempt`, the boolean value passed through the function's parameter and 
checks if it is true--if yes, the timer begins by calling the `setitimer()`. If 
not, the function calls `getitimer()` to simply store the intial timer 
configuration which will be used when `preempt_stop()` is called. 

`preempt_stop()` stops the thread preemption. This function does this by passing 
`previous_timer` and `previous_sa` (sigaction) into the `setitimer()` and 
`sigaction()` timers. This restores the previous timer configuration and action
associated with the virtual alarm signals.

`preempt_enable()` and `preempt_disable()` utilizes the `sigprocmask()` to block
or unblock the virtual signals, respectively. For cases where `preempt` is set 
to false, these functions, even if called, will be ineffective.

#### Testing
In order to ensure the functionality of the APIs, several test programs were
used.

Other than the ones already provided, we have created two programs: 
`queue_tester.c` to test the Queue API and `preempt_tester.c` to test the 
preemption API. 

In `queue_tester.c`, there are a few test cases to test each of the functions in
the queue API. These test cases check for successful completion of the desired
functions ability, but also the handling of errors and incorrect usage.  

`preempt_tester.c` tests the handling of threads that run for too long on the 
CPU by using `sleep()`. This program handles two threads that continuously call
`sleep()` which forces them to be preempted and yield to the other until 
completion. 

#### Sources
- [23.4 Complete Context Control](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/2.36/html_mono/libc.html#index-getcontext)
- [getcontext(3) — Linux manual page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/getcontext.3.html)
- [makecontext(3) — Linux manual page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/makecontext.3.html)
- [ucontext - user context](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7908799/xsh/ucontext.h.html)

Commit message:

clean up on REPORT.md, sem_starve.c, preempt.c

REPORT.md, after:

<h1 align = "center"> Operating Systems - Project 2 </h1>
<h2 align = "center"> ECS 150 - Winter Quarter 2023 </h2>
<h3 align = "center"> Chloe Bercy and Jen Galicia </h3>
<h4 align = "center"> February 21, 2023 </h4>

## Table of Contents
1. Summary
2. Implementation
    * Queue
    * Uthread
    * Semaphore
    * Preemption
3. Testing
4. Sources

## Summary
`libuthread` is a basic user-level thread library for Linux. It provides an 
interface for applications to create and run independent threads concurrently.
Like most lightweight user-level thread libraries, this library can create new 
threads, schedule the execution of threads using a round-robin algorithm, be 
preemptive, and provide a thread synchronization API, semaphores.

## Implementation
The implementation of `libuthread` is made up of several major phases - queue, 
uthread, semaphore, and preemption.

#### Queue API
We implemented a FIFO queue using a linked list data structure. Just like any 
other queue, it has the typical `create`, `destroy`, `enqueue`, `delete` and 
`dequeue` functions. However, what stands out in our queue API is the 
`queue_iterate()` function.

The `queue_iterate()` function is a generic way to call a custom function on 
each item that is enqueued in the queue. How it works is that it takes a queue 
and a queue callback function type `queue_func_t` as the parameters. 

`queue_func_t func` is the function to be defined by the user. It takes a queue 
and a void pointer to a data item as parameters. 

Within the `queue_iterate()` function, it first checks to see if `queue` and 
`func` are `NULL`, if so, it returns -1. We then a run a for-loop to go through 
each currently enqueued item in the queue. The current item is received as the 
data parameter in the queue callback function type so the program knows which 
data item to run the function defined by the user on. After iterating through 
each item in the queue `queue_iterate()` returns 0 to indicate that it has ran 
successfully. 

#### Uthread API
The standard interface for threads on a Unix-style operating system is known as 
the `POSIX thread` or `pthread`. In this project, we only implement the 
following functions: `uthread_yield()`, `uthread_exit()`, `uthread_create()`, 
`uthread_run()`, `uthread_block()`, and `uthread_unblock()`.

It's important to note that we have the following global variables: `struct 
uthread **current` and `queue_t *ready_q`. This is so that all of the functions 
in `uthread.c` have access to the thread control blocks and the queue. 

The function to first be called by the application is `uthread_run()` which 
creates the first user thread. We inititalize the `ready_q` using the 
`queue_create()` function and we also initialize the `current` tcb by `malloc`. 
We then call the `uthread_create()` function to create and begin the queue and 
the first thread. 

As the name of the `uthread_create()` function suggests, this creates a new 
thread. This is done by malloc-ing a `uthread_tcb` called newTCB and its 
context. The function then calls `uthread_ctx_init()` which initializes the 
context for a newly created thread. Once context has been created, that TCB is 
then queued to our `ready_q`.

Going back to the `uthread_run()` function, after `uthread_create()` is called, 
we enter a while-loop that calls `uthread_yield()` as long as the the `ready_q` 
is not empty. 

`uthread_yield()` allows for other threads in the queue to execute, not just the
currently active and running thread. In this function, we define 
`struct uthread tcb *uthread_prev` to which we set it to the current tcb. This 
is to save the context of the current thread that is running. We then define 
`struct uthread_tcb *uthread_next`, set this pointer to the next item in the 
queue, and set it to the current tcb to update it. Once this is complete, the 
function calls `uthread_ctx_switch()`, which basically switches the contexts of
the previous thread and the next thread. The application will be able to 
resume and execute the next thread. 

Both the functions `uthread_block()` and `uthread_unblock()` comes more into 
play when we head over to the implementation of semaphores. How these two 
functions work will be explained in the next section.

With that, we are left with the final function in our queue API, which is 
`uthread_exit()`. This function destroys the current tcb stack and it frees the 
context of the current thread. If there happens to be more threads in the queue,
the current simply gets updated to the next thread in the queue. 

#### Semaphore API + uthread_block() + uthread_unblock()
To control access to a common resource by multiple threads, we implemented the 
following functions in our semaphore API: `sem_create()`, `sem_destroy()`, 
`sem_down()`, `sem_up()`.

In the `sem_create()` function, it initializes a new semaphore. Along with that,
it also creates a new queue to which we set it to the `queue_t blocked_q` data 
member as defined in the `struct semaphore`. The reasoning behind this is so 
that the application can differentiate the threads that are ready for execution 
and the threads that are blocked from executing. The count of the semaphore is 
set to the count passed through the `size_t count` parameter. 

The `sem_destroy()` destroys the semaphore, as the name suggests. It checks to 
see if the semaphore is `NULL` or if there are any threads in the `blocked_q`. 
If either of those are true, then the function returns `-1`. If not, then 
`queue_destroy()` gets called to destroy the queue of blocked threads and 
returns 0 to indicate that the semaphore has been successfully destroyed. 

`sem_down()` is the function that is called when a thread asks to grab a 
resource. It takes a semaphore as a parameter and checks to see if it is `NULL`.
If the count of the semaphore is 0, it enters a while-loop in which the current 
threads are queued to the `blocked_q`. Afterward, `uthread_block()` is called. 
Otherwise, the count is decremented.

Similar to the `uthread_yield()` function, `uthread_block()` swaps the contexts 
of the current tcb with the next tcb. What sets these two functions apart, 
however, is that `uthread_yield()` queues the current thread back into the ready
queue as aforementioned. To unblock the threads that are in the blocked queue
--in other words, put the blocked threads back into the ready queue--we simply 
call `queue_enqueue()` and queue the current thread to the `ready_q`. All of 
this is defined in the `uthread_unblock()` function. 

To release a semaphore, `sem_up()` is called. Just like the `sem_down()` 
function, it begins with checking to see if the semaphore is `NULL`. If it 
isn't, then the count is incremented. If there happens to be any threads in the 
`blocked_q`, it initializes a pointer to indicate the next thread to be 
executed, calls the `queue_dequeue()` function to take the oldest item in the 
`blocked_q`, and calls `uthread_unblock()` to put the item that has been pulled 
back into the `ready_q`.

#### Preemption
TO NOTE: The implementation of preemption does not currently work as desired.
It uses ITIMER_REAL and SIGALRM, instead of ITIMER_VIRTUAL and SIGVTALARM due to
difficitulties in debugging issues with unsuccessful `setitimer(ITIMER_VIRTUAL)`
calls. 

The preemption API exists to prevent uncooperative threads from keeping the 
processing resource for themselves. We have implemented the following functions:
`preempt_start()`, `preempt_stop()`, `preempt_enable`, and `preempt_disable()`. 

In `preempt_start()`, we simply configure the timer interrupt handler. It then 
takes `preempt`, the boolean value passed through the function's parameter and 
checks if it is true--if yes, the timer begins by calling the `setitimer()`. If 
not, the function calls `getitimer()` to simply store the intial timer 
configuration which will be used when `preempt_stop()` is called. 

`preempt_stop()` stops the thread preemption. This function does this by passing 
`previous_timer` and `previous_sa` (sigaction) into the `setitimer()` and 
`sigaction()` timers. This restores the previous timer configuration and action
associated with the virtual alarm signals.

`preempt_enable()` and `preempt_disable()` utilizes the `sigprocmask()` to block
or unblock the virtual signals, respectively. For cases where `preempt` is set 
to false, these functions, even if called, will be ineffective.

#### Testing
In order to ensure the functionality of the APIs, several test programs were
used.

Other than the ones already provided, we have created three programs: 
`queue_tester.c` to test the Queue API, `preempt_tester.c` to test the 
preemption API, and `sem_starve.c` to test starvation handling by the semaphore. 

In `queue_tester.c`, there are a few test cases to test each of the functions in
the queue API. These test cases check for successful completion of the desired
functions ability, but also the handling of errors and incorrect usage.  

`preempt_tester.c` tests the handling of threads that run for too long on the 
CPU by using `sleep()`. This program handles two threads that continuously call
`sleep()` which forces them to be preempted and yield to the other until 
completion. 

`sem_starve.c` tests if the semaphore will make sure `thread1`, which has been
unable to access a resource, is prioritized to become "unstarved".

#### Sources
- [23.4 Complete Context Control](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/2.36/html_mono/libc.html#index-getcontext)
- [getcontext(3) — Linux manual page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/getcontext.3.html)
- [makecontext(3) — Linux manual page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/makecontext.3.html)
- [ucontext - user context](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7908799/xsh/ucontext.h.html)
